# Gondolin
## Readme, Citations, Line by Line Thought Process

4. 	“Far too long” -- Tolkien characters seem to use phrases like this throughout Lord of the Rings. Recurrent nightmares are often associated with the symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).
5.  “There and Back Again”, the Hobbit alternate title, and way to link Tolkien language to traumatic flashbacks.

6.  Maedhros, son of Feanor rallied armies of the free peoples of Middle Earth to attack Morgoth’s fortress of Angband following the events of the tale of Beren and Luthien. 
7.  Glorfindel was present during the ensuing battle. “Oaths of blasphemy”, refers to the oath of Feanor and his sons to recover the Silmarils (jewels of light crafted from the Two Trees of Valinor) at all costs, regardless of who possessed them and by any means necessary. 
8.  Balrogs are described throughout Tolkien’s Legendarium has having whips of pure flame. Angband translates to “Iron prison” and was Morgoth’s fortress during the events of the First Age of Middle Earth.
9.  This a reference to the breaking of the Fellowship of the Ring. Elves are almost always depicted as having sharp or pointed ears -- but the word ‘ring’ may also be a sound.
10. Tolkien frequently refers to the Ring as a long burden which could be interpreted as more PTSD references. 
11. Ulmo the Valar of the sea appears to Tuor in the Fall of Gondolin but he is often described throughout the Silmarillion as communicating to the Free Peoples through the presence of water.
12. Nirnaeth Arnoediad translates to the Battle of Unnumbered Tears. The armies of Middle Earth marched on the gates of Angband and were massacred almost completely. Glorfindel, Ecthelion, Maeglin, Turgon, and Hurin were part of this terrible battle.
13. “for few now live to protect this realm” is borrowed from the introduction to Peter Jackson’s The Fellowship of the Ring, “for none now live who remember it” as played by actress Cate Blanchet.  
15. This character is not Gandalf the Grey but uses the same imagery. ‘Conjuring’ refers to Gandalf’s line to Bilbo “Do not take for some conjurer of cheap tricks” as played by Sir Ian Mclellan in the The Fellowship of the Ring. “voiceless it cries” is part of one of Gollum’s riddles in The Hobbit.
16. Glaurung is the wingless father of dragons created by Morgoth. Hurin was fastened to a seat in Angband and forced to watch through Morgoth’s sorcery the events of The Children of Hurin. “Wingless it flutters” is part of the same riddle made by Gollum. “Blades of black” refers to the Black Sword, Anglachel (forged by Eol the Dark Elf) which was wielded by Turin Turimbar, the son of Hurin.
17.  Thorin Oakenshield’s company refer to Bilbo as the “burglar”. Gollum engages Bilbo in the chapter Riddles in the Dark where they play a “game of riddles”.
18. “endless screams and inane babble” is borrowed from Ian Mclellan as Gandalf in The Fellowship of the Ring. “no gift to the foes of Melkor” is inverted from “it is a gift to the foes of Mordor” spoken by Boromir as played by Sean Bean. It is a way to initialize character symmetry between Boromir and Glorfindel.
19. Sauron is referred to as “the Enemy” in the Lord of the Rings. But, Morgoth translates to ‘Dark Enemy’ serving the same role in the First Age.
20. This language is derived from how Gollum often addresses Samwise Gamgee in Lord of the Rings. Hurin was taken to Gondolin in his youth, but chose to leave to battle the forces of Morgoth. Following the events of The Children of Hurin, he was released by Morgoth, he attempted to reenter the Elven city but to no avail. “Hissing wyrm strikes with words” -- Glaurung is depicted as cunning and having charisma, serving in positions of leadership in Morgoth’s forces. The Dragon taunts Turin and convinces Niennor (Hurin’s daughter) to commit suicide. 
21. “Mouthless it mutters” another line in Gollum’s riddle. “Gondolin, Gondolin” sounds similar to Gollum’s characteristic strangled cough.
22. “Will you not hear me in your high halls?” is a direct quote from the Silmarillion. Hurin’s attempts to return to Gondolin is met with indifference by Turgon. “Your aim falters” this is a possible symptom of “shell shock” -- another PTSD reference. Frodo and Bilbo are unable to kill Gollum out of pity.
23. ‘Wind’ is the answer to Gollum’s riddle. Hurin is from the race of Men in Tolkien’s Legendarium. He also lost everything after his capture. He was released so that Morgoth might locate Gondolin which was hidden in the mountain’s south of Angband. The Clouds Burst is a chapter in The Hobbit following the Battle of Five Armies in and around when the Eagles make their appearance. 
24. “cannot see all ends” is borrowed from Gandalf’s dialogue (Ian Mclellan) with Frodo Baggins in the Mines of Moria, “even the very wise cannot see all ends” -- this a critical hint as to who may be the narrator. The Eagles of Middle Earth made their home in the mountains which encircled Gondolin. “Hide in their pocket” this is referencing Bilbo Baggins’ riddle to Gollum. Bilbo, of course, had the ring or Gollum’s “precious” in his pocket. 
26.  “this new mockery” is borrowed from “what is this new devilry?” spoken by Boromir played Sean Bean in The Fellowship of The Ring, when the Balrog appears before the Bridge of Khazad Dum. 
27. The Eagles formerly made their home in the mountains above Angband, the “bells” is actually borrowed from Indiana Jones and The Temple Doom, the scene which depicts human sacrifice (it seemed appropriate in this case). “Northern sands” refers to the plains of Anfauglith that exists between Angband and the mountains encircling Gondolin.
28. Anfauglith translates to “gasping dust”. It was once a grassy plain until Dagor Bragollach or Battle of Sudden Flame. “Three mountains” refers to Thangorodrim which is are three conjoined volcanic mountains. During this battle, Thangorodrim erupted and Morgoth’s forces, including Glaurung, attacked.
29. Following the death of Feanor, Maedhros became king of the Noldor, but was soon captured by Morgoth’s forces and chained by the hand to a cliff on Thangorodrim. He was rescued by Fingon, his cousin, and Thorondor, the King of the Eagles. However, his hand was severed during the rescue. 
30. Cascading glaciers refers to Mount Rainier, Mount Saint Helens, and Mount Baker, three volcanic mountains which surround the city of Seattle. It is convenient imagery that also distinguishes it from Mordor. The Elven High King Fingolfin rode to the gates of Angband to personally challenge Morgoth to single combat, and was killed during the duel.
31. “Two ruined trees” refers to the Trees of Valinor which were destroyed by Morgoth and Ungoliant, the giant spider. “fair maiden’s song” refers to Luthien who sang to the court of Morgoth while Beren took one of the Silmarils from the Dark Lord’s crown while he fell into sleep. Following this event, Maedhros believed Morgoth’s powers were waning and began to rally the armies of his allies to march on Angband. Following the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, Morgoth’s forces piled the countless slain into a hill on the plains of Anfauglith.
32. Glorfindel is Lord of the House of the Golden Flower. “Can no longer keep these lands safe” is borrowed from Boromir (Sean Bean) who states “by the blood of our people are your lands kept safe”. Turgon makes a similar claim to Eol the Dark Elf with regard to the efforts of the Noldor Elves.
33. Again, a reference to Gandalf’s Moria speech to Frodo discussing the fate of Gollum/Smeagol. 
34.  “rivens” an obvious reference to Rivendell,  “arched gates in stone” refers to the doors to Moria, but also has a similar sound to Arkenstone the jewel valued by the dwarves of the Lonely Mountain, Following the conclusion of the First Age, Morgoth was captured and cast through the Door of Night into the Timeless Void (possibly outer space)
35. “one does not simply walk into the last great Elven city” refers to Boromir’s line “One does simply walk into Mordor...” Following the Battle of Unnumbered Tears, Morgoth waged a military campaign that destroyed almost every major city and settlement belonging to the Elves in Beleriand. Gondolin is also hidden by magic and the encircling mountains of the region.
37. A reference to mirror of Galadriel
38. A reference to the Hagia Sophia of modern day Istanbul. No such dome is referenced to describe the city of Gondolin. However, Osgiliath the former capital of Gondor is said to have a “dome of the stars”. In the Peter Jackson movies, a ruined dome structure is visible in various scenes in the embattled human city. Varda, also known as Elbereth Gilthoniel, is the Valar of the Stars. She is married to Manwe, the king of the Valar. The previous line creates symmetry between her and Galadriel.
39. Commentary on depression and anxiety.
40. Hobbit references. The Unexpected Party. Bilbo’s sword ‘Sting’ supposedly came from the city of Gondolin. Glorfindel is also easily startled, more possible PTSD symptoms, ‘timeless depths’ is borrowed from Tolkien’s Timeless Void as described in the Silmarillion. The imagery comes from Peter Jackson’s The Fellowship of the Ring, where Samwise Gamgee (Sean Astin) nearly drowns in a lake following the breaking of the fellowship, he is pulled out by Frodo Baggins (Elijah Wood). In this case, Glorfindel is pulled out of depression by the child Earendil.
41. “little one, steel ringed with fine mail of silver” this refers to the mithril chain mail gifted to Frodo by Bilbo, in Tolkien’s The Fellowship of the Ring, a song reference is made to Earendil the Mariner as having ‘chained rings’. There is no evidence that these are the same shirts but it is a way to equate Frodo to Earendil as they both embark on journeys of self sacrifice. Furthermore, at the departure from Lothlorien Galadriel presents Frodo with a phial of liquid she calls the “the light of Earendil”
42. “and no one should sail alone” this is borrowed from Boromir (Sean Bean) claiming that “no one should wander alone”, right before he tries to take the ring from Frodo.  “not even the wisest of Mariners” this is borrowed from Galadriel (Cate Blanchett) when she says “even the wisest cannot tell” as Frodo looks into the mirror. Lastly, Glorfindel is referencing a tribe of Elves known as the Teleri, which were known to be a sea-going people, they were later a victim of a massacre carried out by Feanor and the Noldor. Glorfindel belongs to the Noldor but according to Tolkien took no part in the “kinslaying”. Feanor wanted to use the Teleri’s ships to cross the sea from Valinor to Middle Earth.
43. “Put aside your feelings” In Peter Jackson’s Return of the King, Elrond (Hugo Weaving) tells Aragorn (Viggo Mortenson) to “Put aside the Ranger”. Earendil is also the child of Idril and Elven Princess and Tuor a mortal man from the house of Hador, and relative of Hurin. Tolkien states that Earendil’s age is 7 years old.
44.  “always steer West” The Elves of Middle Earth are sailing West in Lord of the Rings in an attempt to reach Valinor. Aragorn also wields a sword called Anduril or “flame of the West” “when all other lights go out” refers to the Light of Earendil which Galadriel presents to Frodo as the fellowship departs Lothlorien.
45. Glorfindel is encouraging Earendil to become a Mariner rather than a soldier.
46. Idril is the daughter of Turgon, the High King of the Noldor, and mother of Earendil. Earendil is also the father of Elrond and Elros (the first king of Numenor), making him an ancestor of Aragorn as well.
50. Palatial gardens” references the hanging gardens of Babylon. “flask of wine” could be a sign of possible substance abuse, in this case alcoholism.
51. “Striding” references Aragorn’s alias ‘Strider’, “wearing wings” while in exile Tuor discovered a suit of armor formerly belonging to Turgon which had a crest representing swan wings. Later, he served Turgon as the Lord of the House of the Wing. This imagery is later used by the Numenoreans and the Kings of Gondor.  “warnings reforged in the broken revelry” is another link to Aragorn, this refers to the sword Anduril which was reforged from Isildur’s sword Narsil, that was used to cut the ring from the hand of Sauron.
52. Belshazzar’s Feast, Andrea Celesti, Italian painter, 1705, “The King in Yellow” by Robert W. Chambers, 1895. “late hours his Nephew chooses to appear” is borrowed from “late is the hour this conjurer chooses to appear” spoken by Grima Wormtongue (Brad Dourif) in Peter Jackson’s The Two Towers. Also a reference to Denethor the Steward of Gondor.
53. Maeglin is the son of Turgon’s sister Aredhel and is described as wearing sable. However, numerous images (fan art) depict him as wearing black and violet.
54. The name ‘Maeglin’ translates to ‘sharp glance’. He greatly desires his cousin Idril, who repeatedly rejects his advances. “Wraith” is of course a reference to the Nazgul. “Witless flattery” is derived from Gandalf calling Wormtongue a “witless worm” in Peter Jackson’s The Two Towers. Maeglin also betrays the city of Gondolin to Morgoth after being captured, in exchange for rulership of the city, and the hand of Idril.
55. “A just question my lady” is borrowed from “A just question my liege” spoken by Wormtongue (Brad Dourif) who is addressing Theoden of Rohan in The Two Towers. Courts of glass is a twist on the "glass ceiling" concept.
56. “his forked tongue” is derived of Gandalf’s (Ian Mclellan) line “keep your forked tongue behind your teeth”
57. Ecthelion is depicted in Tolkien’s works as being a musician. “Music is forsaken for madness” is derived from Gandalf’s line “When has Saruman the Wise forsaken reason for madness” in Peter Jackson’s The Fellowship of the Ring. Maeglin is also the son of Eol, the Dark Elf. 
58. Aredhel, Turgon’s sister, chose to leave the city of Gondolin. Glorfindel and Ecthelion were sent to escort her. However, they became separated from her. While wandering in the forests she met Eol, who coerced her marriage. Later, Aredhel fled Eol to return to Gondolin, this time with their son Maeglin. Eol pursued them into the court of Turgon. When Eol refused to remain inside the hidden city he hurled a poisoned javelin at Maeglin but hit Aredhel instead. Eol was then executed by being thrown from the highest tower. Later, during the events of the Fall of Gondolin, Maeglin was confronted by Tuor after placing his hands on Idril. The two fought, and Maeglin was thrown from the tower as his father before him. “Drink slows his mind” is derived from Saruman as played by Christopher Lee when addressing Gandalf, “Your love of the halfling’s leaf, has clearly slowed your mind”.
59. Ecthelion is described as wearing a spiked war helmet. “grows tall” is derived from dialogue from Peregrin Took when describing his own height in Return of the King.

“As you wish, I care not” is spoken by Boromir (Sean Bean) when briefly holding the ring at the Pass of Caradhras. 












